feat(combobox): initial design guidance (#9)
vmware-clarity/clarity-guidance: 1007-combobox-design-guidance.md

---
category: component design guidance
state: draft
created: 2024-10-16
updated: 2024-10-22
---

# Combobox Design Guidance

The [combobox](https://clarity.design/documentation/combobox) is a complex component that uses a text input box and a drop-down list. The user can enter text into the input to filter the set of predefined options in the drop-down.

## Guidance

### Combobox Usage

> - **Must** use a combobox for a long list of options (more than 10 options).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use a combobox for lists with more than 10 options. This allows users to easily filter through the options by typing, improving usability and efficiency.
```

> - **Must** use a combobox when you need search and filtering capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use a combobox when search and filtering capabilities are needed. This allows users to quickly find specific options from a long list, improving accuracy in their selections and reducing the time spent searching.
```

> - **Must not** allow to add free text input that is not part of the predefined list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must not** allow free text input that is not part of the predefined list in a combobox. This ensures that users only select valid options, maintaining consistency and preventing errors in data entry.
```

> - **Should** use a combobox when you need to select multiple items in a list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use a combobox when selecting multiple items from a list. This allows users to easily filter and choose options while keeping the interface organized and user-friendly.
```

> - **Should** use a combobox when you need data to be loaded asynchronously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use a combobox when data needs to be loaded asynchronously. This allows users to begin their selection while the options are being fetched, enhancing the overall user experience and reducing wait times.
```

> - **Should** use a combobox when you have custom Input or to show a richer UI in the list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use a combobox when custom input is required or when there’s a need to display a richer user interface in the list. This enhances user interaction by allowing for both predefined options and unique entries, improving flexibility and functionality.
```

### Combobox Typography

> - **Must** keep the option text in the combobox short and concise to improve readability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** keep the option text in the combobox short and concise to improve readability. This helps users quickly scan and understand their choices, enhancing the overall user experience.
```

> - **Should** have a label to make it accessible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** include a label for the combobox to ensure accessibility. This helps users understand the purpose of the input and supports those using assistive technologies.
```

> - The length of the items in a combobox **should not** be wider than the text field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should not** allow the length of the items in a combobox to exceed the width of the text field. This ensures that all options are visible and prevents layout issues, maintaining a clean and user-friendly interface.
```
